Pipelines
=========

To transmogrify, or import and convert non-plone content, you simply define a
pipeline. Pipe sections, the equivalent of parts in a buildout_, are slotted
together into a processing pipe. To slot sections together, you define a
configuration file, define named sections, and a main pipeline definition that
names the sections in order (one section per line):

    >>> exampleconfig = """\
    ... [transmogrifier]
    ... pipeline =
    ...     section 1
    ...     section 2
    ...     section 3
    ...
    ... [section 1]
    ... blueprint = collective.transmogrifier.tests.examplesource
    ... size = 5
    ...
    ... [section 2]
    ... blueprint = collective.transmogrifier.tests.exampletransform
    ...
    ... [section 3]
    ... blueprint = collective.transmogrifier.tests.exampleconstructor
    ... """

As you can see this is also very similar to how you construct WSGI pipelines
using paster. The format of the configuration files is defined by the Python
ConfigParser module, with extensions that we'll describe later. At minimum, at
least the transmogrifier section with an empty pipeline is required:

    >>> mimimalconfig = """\
    ... [transmogrifier]
    ... pipeline =
    ... """

Transmogrifier can load these configuration files either by looking them up
in a registry or by loading them from a python package.

You register transmogrifier configurations using the ``registerConfig``
directive in the http://namespaces.plone.org/transmogrifier namespace,
together with a name, and optionally a title and description::

  <configure
      xmlns="http://namespaces.zope.org/zope"
      xmlns:transmogrifier="http://namespaces.plone.org/transmogrifier"
      i18n_domain="collective.transmogrifier">

  <transmogrifier:registerConfig
      name="exampleconfig"
      title="Example pipeline configuration"
      description="This is an example pipeline configuration"
      configuration="example.cfg"
      />

  </configure>

You can then tell transmogrifier to load the 'exampleconfig' configuration. To
load configuration files directly from a python package, name the package and
the configuration file separated by a colon, such as
'collective.transmogrifier.tests:exampleconfig.cfg'.

Registering files with the transmogrifier registry allows other uses, such as
listing available configurations in a user interface, together with the
registered description. Loading files directly let's you build reusable
libraries of configuration files more quickly though.

In this document we'll use the shorthand *registerConfig* to register
example configurations:

    >>> registerConfig('collective.transmogrifier.tests.exampleconfig',
    ...                exampleconfig)

Pipeline sections
-----------------

Each section in the pipeline is created by a blueprint. Blueprints are looked
up as named utilities implementing the ISectionBlueprint interface. In the
transmogrifier configuration file, you refer to blueprints by the name under
which they are registered. Blueprints are factories; when called they produce
an ISection pipe section. ISections in turn, are iterators implementing the
`iterator protocol`_.

Here is a simple blueprint, in the form of a class definition:

    >>> from zope.component import provideUtility
    >>> from zope.interface import provider
    >>> from zope.interface import implementer

    >>> @provider(ISectionBlueprint)
    ... @implementer(ISection)
    ... class ExampleTransform(object):
    ...
    ...     def __init__(self, transmogrifier, name, options, previous):
    ...         self.previous = previous
    ...         self.name = name
    ...
    ...     def __iter__(self):
    ...         for item in self.previous:
    ...             item['exampletransformname'] = self.name
    ...             yield item
    ...
    >>> provideUtility(ExampleTransform,
    ...                name='collective.transmogrifier.tests.exampletransform')

Note that we register this class as a named utility, and that instances of
this class can be used as an iterator. When slotted together, items 'flow'
through the pipeline by iterating over the last section, which in turn
iterates over it's preceding section (``self.previous`` in the example), and
so on.

By iterating over the source, then yielding the items again, each section
passes items on to the next section. During the iteration loop, sections can
manipulate the items. Note that items are python dictionaries; sections simply
operate on the keys they care about. In our example we add a new key,
``exampletransformname``, which we set to the name of the section.

Sources
~~~~~~~

The items that flow through the pipe have to originate from somewhere though.
This is where special sections, sources, come in. A source is simply a pipe
section that inserts extra items into the pipeline. This is best illustrated
with another example:

    >>> @implementer(ISection)
    ... @provider(ISectionBlueprint)
    ... class ExampleSource(object):
    ...
    ...     def __init__(self, transmogrifier, name, options, previous):
    ...         self.previous = previous
    ...         self.size = int(options['size'])
    ...
    ...     def __iter__(self):
    ...         for item in self.previous:
    ...             yield item
    ...
    ...         for i in range(self.size):
    ...             yield dict(id='item%02d' % i)
    ...
    >>> provideUtility(ExampleSource,
    ...                name='collective.transmogrifier.tests.examplesource')

In this example we use the ``options`` dictionary to read options from the
section configuration, which in the example configuration we gave earlier has
the option ``size`` defined as 5. Note that the configuration values are
always strings, so we need to convert the size option to an integer here.

The source first iterates over the previous section and yields all items
unchanged. Only when that loop is done, does the source produce new items and
puts those into the pipeline. This order is important: when you slot multiple
source sections together, you want items produced by earlier sections to be
processed first too.

There is always a previous section, even for the first section defined in the
pipeline. Transmogrifier passes in a empty iterator when it instantiates this
first section, expecting such a first section to be a source that'll produce
items for the pipeline to process.

Constructors
~~~~~~~~~~~~

As stated before, transmogrifier is intended for importing content into a
Plone site. However, transmogrifier itself only drives the pipeline, inserting
an empty iterator and discarding whatever it pulls out of the last section.

In order to create content then, a constructor section is required. Like
source sections, you should be able to use multiple constructors, so
constructors should always start with yielding the items passed in from the
previous section on to a possible next section.

So, a constructor section is an ISection that consumes items from the previous
section, and affects the plone site based on items, usually by creating
content objects based on these items, then yield the item for a next section.
For example purposes, we simply pretty print the items instead:

    >>> import pprint
    >>> @implementer(ISection)
    ... @provider(ISectionBlueprint)
    ... class ExampleConstructor(object):
    ...
    ...     def __init__(self, transmogrifier, name, options, previous):
    ...         self.previous = previous
    ...         self.pprint = pprint.PrettyPrinter().pprint
    ...
    ...     def __iter__(self):
    ...         for item in self.previous:
    ...             self.pprint(sorted(item.items()))
    ...             yield item
    ...
    >>> provideUtility(ExampleConstructor,
    ...                name='collective.transmogrifier.tests.exampleconstructor')

With this last section blueprint example completed, we can load the example
configuration we created earlier, and run our transmogrification:

    >>> from collective.transmogrifier.transmogrifier import Transmogrifier
    >>> transmogrifier = Transmogrifier(plone)
    >>> transmogrifier('collective.transmogrifier.tests.exampleconfig')
    [('exampletransformname', 'section 2'), ('id', 'item00')]
    [('exampletransformname', 'section 2'), ('id', 'item01')]
    [('exampletransformname', 'section 2'), ('id', 'item02')]
    [('exampletransformname', 'section 2'), ('id', 'item03')]
    [('exampletransformname', 'section 2'), ('id', 'item04')]

Developing blueprints
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As we could see from the ISectionBlueprint examples above, a blueprint gets
called with several arguments: ``transmogrifier``, ``name``, ``options`` and
``previous``.

We discussed ``previous`` before, it is a reference to the previous pipe
section and must be looped over when the section itself is iterated. The
``name`` argument is simply the name of the section as given in the
configuration file.

The ``transmogrifier`` argument is a reference to the transmogrifier itself,
and it can be used to reach the context we are importing to through it's
``context`` attribute. The transmogrifier also acts as a dictionary, mapping
from section names to a mapping of the options in each section.

Finally, as seen before, the ``options`` argument is a mapping of the current
section options. It is the same mapping as can be had through
``transmogrifier[name]``.

A short example shows each of these arguments in action:

    >>> @implementer(ISection)
    ... @provider(ISectionBlueprint)
    ... class TitleExampleSection(object):
    ...
    ...     def __init__(self, transmogrifier, name, options, previous):
    ...         self.transmogrifier = transmogrifier
    ...         self.name = name
    ...         self.options = options
    ...         self.previous = previous
    ...
    ...         pipeline = transmogrifier['transmogrifier']['pipeline']
    ...         pipeline_size = len([s.strip() for s in pipeline.split('\n')
    ...                              if s.strip()])
    ...         self.size = options['pipeline-size'] = str(pipeline_size)
    ...         self.site_title = transmogrifier.context.Title()
    ...
    ...     def __iter__(self):
    ...         for item in self.previous:
    ...             item['pipeline-size'] = self.size
    ...             item['title'] = '%s - %s' % (self.site_title, item['id'])
    ...             yield item
    >>> provideUtility(TitleExampleSection,
    ...                name='collective.transmogrifier.tests.titleexample')
    >>> titlepipeline = """\
    ... [transmogrifier]
    ... pipeline =
    ...     section1
    ...     titlesection
    ...     section3
    ...
    ... [section1]
    ... blueprint = collective.transmogrifier.tests.examplesource
    ... size = 5
    ...
    ... [titlesection]
    ... blueprint = collective.transmogrifier.tests.titleexample
    ...
    ... [section3]
    ... blueprint = collective.transmogrifier.tests.exampleconstructor
    ... """
    >>> registerConfig('collective.transmogrifier.tests.titlepipeline',
    ...                titlepipeline)
    >>> plone.Title()
    'Plone Test Site'
    >>> transmogrifier = Transmogrifier(plone)
    >>> transmogrifier('collective.transmogrifier.tests.titlepipeline')
    [('id', 'item00'),
     ('pipeline-size', '3'),
     ('title', 'Plone Test Site - item00')]
    [('id', 'item01'),
     ('pipeline-size', '3'),
     ('title', 'Plone Test Site - item01')]
    [('id', 'item02'),
     ('pipeline-size', '3'),
     ('title', 'Plone Test Site - item02')]
    [('id', 'item03'),
     ('pipeline-size', '3'),
     ('title', 'Plone Test Site - item03')]
    [('id', 'item04'),
     ('pipeline-size', '3'),
     ('title', 'Plone Test Site - item04')]

Configuration file syntax
-------------------------

As mentioned earlier, the configuration files use the format
defined by the Python ConfigParser module with extensions. The
extensions are based on the zc.buildout extensions and are:

- option names are case sensitive

- option values can use a substitution syntax, described below, to
  refer to option values in specific sections.

- you can include other configuration files, see `Including other
  configurations`_.

The ConfigParser syntax is very flexible. Section names can contain any
characters other than newlines and right square braces ("]"). Option names can
contain any characters (within the ASCII character set) other than newlines,
colons, and equal signs, can not start with a space, and don't include
trailing spaces.

It is a good idea to keep section and option names simple, sticking to
alphanumeric characters, hyphens, and periods.

Variable substitution
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Transmogrifier supports a string.Template-like syntax for variable
substitution, using both the section and the option name joined by a colon:

    >>> substitutionexample = """\
    ... [transmogrifier]
    ... pipeline =
    ...     section1
    ...     section2
    ...     section3
    ...
    ... [definitions]
    ... item_count = 3
    ...
    ... [section1]
    ... blueprint = collective.transmogrifier.tests.examplesource
    ... size = ${definitions:item_count}
    ...
    ... [section2]
    ... blueprint = collective.transmogrifier.tests.exampletransform
    ...
    ... [section3]
    ... blueprint = collective.transmogrifier.tests.exampleconstructor
    ... """
    >>> registerConfig('collective.transmogrifier.tests.substitutionexample',
    ...                substitutionexample)

    Here we created an extra section called definitions, and refer to the
    item_count option defined in that section to set the size of the section1
    pipeline section, so we only get 3 items when we execute this pipeline:

    >>> transmogrifier = Transmogrifier(plone)
    >>> transmogrifier('collective.transmogrifier.tests.substitutionexample')
    [('exampletransformname', 'section2'), ('id', 'item00')]
    [('exampletransformname', 'section2'), ('id', 'item01')]
    [('exampletransformname', 'section2'), ('id', 'item02')]

Including other configurations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can include other transmogrifier configurations with the ``include``
option in the transmogrifier section. This option takes a list of
configuration ids, separated by whitespace. All sections and options from
those configuration files will be included provided the options weren't
already present. This works recursively; inclusions in the included
configuration files are honoured too:

    >>> inclusionexample = """\
    ... [transmogrifier]
    ... include =
    ...     collective.transmogrifier.tests.sources
    ...     collective.transmogrifier.tests.base
    ...
    ... [section1]
    ... size = 3
    ... """
    >>> registerConfig('collective.transmogrifier.tests.inclusionexample',
    ...                inclusionexample)
    >>> sources = """\
    ... [section1]
    ... blueprint = collective.transmogrifier.tests.examplesource
    ... size = 10
    ... """
    >>> registerConfig('collective.transmogrifier.tests.sources',
    ...                sources)
    >>> base = """\
    ... [transmogrifier]
    ... pipeline =
    ...     section1
    ...     section2
    ...     section3
    ... include = collective.transmogrifier.tests.constructor
    ...
    ... [section2]
    ... blueprint = collective.transmogrifier.tests.exampletransform
    ... """
    >>> registerConfig('collective.transmogrifier.tests.base',
    ...                base)
    >>> constructor = """\
    ... [section3]
    ... blueprint = collective.transmogrifier.tests.exampleconstructor
    ... """
    >>> registerConfig('collective.transmogrifier.tests.constructor',
    ...                constructor)
    >>> transmogrifier = Transmogrifier(plone)
    >>> transmogrifier('collective.transmogrifier.tests.inclusionexample')
    [('exampletransformname', 'section2'), ('id', 'item00')]
    [('exampletransformname', 'section2'), ('id', 'item01')]
    [('exampletransformname', 'section2'), ('id', 'item02')]

Like zc.buildout configurations, we can also add or remove lines from included
configuration options, by using the += and -= syntax:

    >>> advancedinclusionexample = """\
    ... [transmogrifier]
    ... include =
    ...     collective.transmogrifier.tests.inclusionexample
    ... pipeline -=
    ...     section2
    ...     section3
    ... pipeline +=
    ...     section4
    ...     section3
    ...
    ... [section4]
    ... blueprint = collective.transmogrifier.tests.titleexample
    ... """
    >>> registerConfig('collective.transmogrifier.tests.advancedinclusionexample',
    ...                advancedinclusionexample)
    >>> transmogrifier = Transmogrifier(plone)
    >>> transmogrifier('collective.transmogrifier.tests.advancedinclusionexample')
    [('id', 'item00'),
     ('pipeline-size', '3'),
     ('title', 'Plone Test Site - item00')]
    [('id', 'item01'),
     ('pipeline-size', '3'),
     ('title', 'Plone Test Site - item01')]
    [('id', 'item02'),
     ('pipeline-size', '3'),
     ('title', 'Plone Test Site - item02')]

When calling transmogrifier, you can provide your own sections too: any extra
keyword is interpreted as a section dictionary. Do make sure you use string
values though:

    >>> transmogrifier('collective.transmogrifier.tests.inclusionexample',
    ...               section1=dict(size='1'))
    [('exampletransformname', 'section2'), ('id', 'item00')]

Conventions
-----------

At its most basic level, transmogrifier pipelines are just iterators passing
'things' around. Transmogrifier doesn't expect anything more than being able
to iterate over the pipeline and doesn't dictate what happens within that
pipeline, what defines a 'thing' or what ultimately gets accomplished.

But as has been stated repeatedly, transmogrifier has been developed to
facilitate importing legacy content, processing data in incremental steps
until a final section constructs new content.

To reach this end, several conventions have been established that help the
various pipeline sections work together.

Items are mappings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first one is that the 'things' passed from section to section are
mappings; i.e. they are or behave just like python dictionaries. Again,
transmogrifier doesn't produce these by itself, source sections (see Sources_)
produce them by injecting them into the stream.

Keys are fields
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Secondly, *all* keys in such mappings that do not start with an underscore
will be used by constructor sections (see Constructors_) to construct Plone
content. So keys that do not start with an underscore are expected to map to
Archetypes fields or Zope3 schema fields or whatever the constructor expects.

Paths are to the target object
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Many sections either create objects (constructors) or operate on
already-constructed or pre-existing objecs. Such sections should interpret
paths as the complete path for the object. For constructors this means they'll
need to split the path into a container path and an id in order for them to
find the correct context for constructing the object.

Keys with a leading underscore are controllers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This leaves the keys that do start with a leading underscore to have special
meaning to specific sections, allowing earlier pipeline sections to inject
'control statements' for later sections in the item mapping. To avoid name
clashes, sections that do expect such controller keys should use prefixes
based on the name under which their blueprint was registered, plus optionally
the name of the pipe section. This allows for precise targeting of pipe
sections when inserting such keys.

We'll illustrate this with an example. Let's say a source section loads news
items from a database, but the database tables for such items hold filenames
to point to binary image data. Rather than have this section load those
filenames directly and add them to the item for image creation, a generic
'file loader' section is used to do this. Let's suppose that this file loader
is registered as ``acme.transmogrifier.fileloader``. This section then could
be instructed to load files and store them in a named key by using 2
'controller' keys named ``_acme.transmogrifier.fileloader_filename`` and
``_acme.transmogrifier.fileloader_targetkey``. If the source section were to
create pipeline items with those keys, this later fileloader section would
then automatically load the filenames and inject them into the items in the
right location.

If you need 2 such loaders, you can target them each individually by including
their section names; so to target just the ``imageloader1`` section you'd use
the keys ``_acme.transmogrifier.fileloader_imageloader1_filename`` and
``_acme.transmogrifier.fileloader_imageloader1_targetkey``. Sections that
support such targeting should prefer such section specific keys over those
only using the blueprint name.

The collective.transmogrifier.utils module has a handy utility method called
``defaultKeys`` that'll generate these keys for you for easy matching:

    >>> from collective.transmogrifier import utils
    >>> keys = utils.defaultKeys('acme.transmogrifier.fileloader',
    ...                          'imageloader1', 'filename')
    >>> pprint.pprint(keys)
    ('_acme.transmogrifier.fileloader_imageloader1_filename',
     '_acme.transmogrifier.fileloader_filename',
     '_imageloader1_filename',
     '_filename')
    >>> utils.Matcher(*keys)('_filename', '_imageloader1_filename')
    ('_imageloader1_filename', True)


Keep memory use to a minimum
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The above example is a little contrived of course; you'd generally configure a
file loader section with a key name to grab the filename from, and perhaps put
the loader *after* the constructor section and load the image data straight
into the already constructed content item instead. This lowers memory
requirements as image data can go directly into the ZODB this way, and the
content object can be deactivated after the binary data has been stored.

By operating on one item at a time, a transmogrifier pipeline can handle huge
numbers of content without breaking memory limits; individual sections should
also avoid using memory unnecessarily.

Previous sections go first
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As mentioned in the Sources_ section, when inserting new items into the
stream, generally previous pipe sections come first. This way someone
constructing a pipeline knows what source section will be processed earlier
(those slotted earlier in the pipeline) and can adjust expectations
accordingly. This makes content construction more predictable when dealing
with multiple sources.

An exception would be a Folder Source, which inserts additional Folder items
into the pipeline to ensure that the required container for any given content
item exists at construction time. Such a source would inject extra items as
needed, not before or after the previous source section.

Iterators have 3 stages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some tasks have to happen before the pipeline runs, or after all content has
been created. In such cases it is handy to realise that iteration within a
section consists of three stages: before iteration, iteration itself, and
after iteration.

For example, a section creating references may have to wait for all content to
be created before it can insert the references. In this case it could build a
queue during iteration, and only when the previous pipe section has been
exhausted and the last item has been yielded would the section reach into the
portal and create all the references.

Sources following the `Previous sections go first`_ convention basically
inject the new items in the after iteration stage.

Here's a piece of psuedo code to illustrate these 3 stages::

    def __iter__(self):
        # Before iteration
        # You can do initialisation here

        for item in self.previous
            # Iteration itself
            # You could process the items, take notes, inject additional
            # items based on the current item in the pipe or manipulate portal
            # content created by previous items
            yield item

        # After iteration
        # The section still has control here and could inject additional
        # items, manipulate all portal content created by the pipeline,
        # or clean up after itself.

You can get quite creative with this. For example, the reference creator could
get quite creative and defer creation of references until it knew the
referenced object has been created too and periodically create these
references. This would keep memory requirements smaller as not *all*
references to create have to be remembered.

Store pipeline-wide information in annotations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If, for some reason or other, you need to remember state across section
instances that is pipeline-wide (such as database connections, or data
counters), such information should be stored as annotations on the transmogrifier object::

    from zope.annotation.interfaces import IAnnotations

    MYKEY = 'foo.bar.baz'

    def __init__(self, transmogrifier, name, options, previous):
        self.storage = IAnnotations(transmogrifier).setdefault(MYKEY, {})
        self.storage.setdefault('spam', 0)
        ...

    def __iter__(self):
        ...
        self.storage['spam'] += 1
        ...

.. _buildout: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/zc.buildout
.. _iterator protocol: http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0234/
